Neofusicoccum and Xylaria are two common endophytic fungi1,2 isolated from two endemic cycad species from Panama. Cycads are the most endangered group of plants – nearly 72% of the 375 species have a critical IUCN status. The main threats are deforestation, poaching and mining. To our knowledge, these are the two first fungal genomes isolated from cycads.
The two cultures were sampled from Zamia pseudoparasitica (Z2) and Zamia nana (Z50), from El Copé and El Valle de Antón respectively, in Central Panamá. Briefly, middle sections of leaf samples were cut into 50 2×2 mm2 fragments, and surface sterilized by placing them in a small strainer that was submerged and shaken constantly while they were passed through a disinfection battery composed of ethyl alcohol (70%), commercial Clorox (5.25% Na Hypochlorite), ethyl alcohol (70%), and finally rinsed in ethyl alcohol (40%) and water. The fragments were seeded on large Petri dishes (90mm x 14mm) containing Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) and incubated at 24°- 26°C (ambient light) for approximately one week to allow fungal growth to emerge. To isolate pure cultures, a fragment of mycelium was taken from each cultivar, transferred to a test tube with inclined PDA, and grown for nearly 2 months.
Genomic DNA (up to 120 ng in 11.7 μl) were used for library synthesis using a KAPA HyperPlus Kit (Roche), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The library was quantified and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq 150-bp paired-end run (300 cycle, v2 kit) at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (Panamá). DNA reads were cleaned, trimmed, and de novo assembled using SPADes3. Genome quality and taxonomic placement were assessed using Minimap4, BUSCO v3.0.25 and BLAST, version 2.9.0+6. Fungal identity and quality were verified using BlobTools7. After selecting only ascomycete contigs and verifying their taxonomic identity, BUSCO was used to estimate completeness of the filtered assemblies.
We then used the Funannotate v1.8.12 pipeline8 to mask repeats, predict, annotate, and compare the genomes. We used the "funannotate predict" command to train and run three ab initio gene predictors—AUGUSTUS v3.3.29, GlimmerHMM10 and SNAP v2006-07-2811. Functional prediction of the gene models was performed using InterProScan v5.57-90.012 with mapping to gene ontology (GO) terms; eggNOG-mapper13; the Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COGs); Pfam domains; the Carbohydrate-Active Enzyme database (CAZY14); the secreted protein database (MEROPS15); BUSCO fungal models and fungal transcription factors. We explored the richness of secondary metabolite gene clusters (SMGCs) using antiSMASH v6.1.116. The relaxed search was conducted on scaffolds and annotated genes (from the funannotate output “annotate results”) using the online settings knownClusterBlast, ClusterBlast, SubClusterBlast, ActiveSiteFinder, Cluster Pfam analysis and Pfam-based GO term annotation.  The genome statistics for each strain are indicated in Table 1.
